Adeimantus -SOCRATES 

I was going to say something in answer to Glaucon, when Adeimantus,
his brother, interposed: Socrates, he said, you do not suppose that
there is nothing more to be urged? 

Why, what else is there? I answered. 
The strongest point of all has not been even mentioned, he replied.

Well, then, according to the proverb, 'Let brother help brother' --if
he fails in any part do you assist him; although I must confess that
Glaucon has already said quite enough to lay me in the dust, and take
from me the power of helping justice. 

Adeimantus 

Nonsense, he replied. But let me add something more: There is another
side to Glaucon's argument about the praise and censure of justice
and injustice, which is equally required in order to bring out what
I believe to be his meaning. Parents and tutors are always telling
their sons and their wards that they are to be just; but why? not
for the sake of justice, but for the sake of character and reputation;
in the hope of obtaining for him who is reputed just some of those
offices, marriages, and the like which Glaucon has enumerated among
the advantages accruing to the unjust from the reputation of justice.
More, however, is made of appearances by this class of persons than
by the others; for they throw in the good opinion of the gods, and
will tell you of a shower of benefits which the heavens, as they say,
rain upon the pious; and this accords with the testimony of the noble
Hesiod and Homer, the first of whom says, that the gods make the oaks
of the just-- 

To hear acorns at their summit, and bees I the middle; 
And the sheep the bowed down bowed the with the their fleeces. and
many other blessings of a like kind are provided for them. And Homer
has a very similar strain; for he speaks of one whose fame is--

As the fame of some blameless king who, like a god, 
Maintains justice to whom the black earth brings forth 
Wheat and barley, whose trees are bowed with fruit, 
And his sheep never fail to bear, and the sea gives him fish. Still
grander are the gifts of heaven which Musaeus and his son vouchsafe
to the just; they take them down into the world below, where they
have the saints lying on couches at a feast, everlastingly drunk,
crowned with garlands; their idea seems to be that an immortality
of drunkenness is the highest meed of virtue. Some extend their rewards
yet further; the posterity, as they say, of the faithful and just
shall survive to the third and fourth generation. This is the style
in which they praise justice. But about the wicked there is another
strain; they bury them in a slough in Hades, and make them carry water
in a sieve; also while they are yet living they bring them to infamy,
and inflict upon them the punishments which Glaucon described as the
portion of the just who are reputed to be unjust; nothing else does
their invention supply. Such is their manner of praising the one and
censuring the other. 

Once more, Socrates, I will ask you to consider another way of speaking
about justice and injustice, which is not confined to the poets, but
is found in prose writers. The universal voice of mankind is always
declaring that justice and virtue are honourable, but grievous and
toilsome; and that the pleasures of vice and injustice are easy of
attainment, and are only censured by law and opinion. They say also
that honesty is for the most part less profitable than dishonesty;
and they are quite ready to call wicked men happy, and to honour them
both in public and private when they are rich or in any other way
influential, while they despise and overlook those who may be weak
and poor, even though acknowledging them to be better than the others.
But most extraordinary of all is their mode of speaking about virtue
and the gods: they say that the gods apportion calamity and misery
to many good men, and good and happiness to the wicked. And mendicant
prophets go to rich men's doors and persuade them that they have a
power committed to them by the gods of making an atonement for a man's
own or his ancestor's sins by sacrifices or charms, with rejoicings
and feasts; and they promise to harm an enemy, whether just or unjust,
at a small cost; with magic arts and incantations binding heaven,
as they say, to execute their will. And the poets are the authorities
to whom they appeal, now smoothing the path of vice with the words
of Hesiod; -- 

Vice may be had in abundance without trouble; the way is smooth and
her dwelling-place is near. But before virtue the gods have set toil,
and a tedious and uphill road: then citing Homer as a witness that
the gods may be influenced by men; for he also says: 

The gods, too, may he turned from their purpose; and men pray to them
and avert their wrath by sacrifices and soothing entreaties, and by
libations and the odour of fat, when they have sinned and transgressed.
And they produce a host of books written by Musaeus and Orpheus, who
were children of the Moon and the Muses --that is what they say --according
to which they perform their ritual, and persuade not only individuals,
but whole cities, that expiations and atonements for sin may be made
by sacrifices and amusements which fill a vacant hour, and are equally
at the service of the living and the dead; the latter sort they call
mysteries, and they redeem us from the pains of hell, but if we neglect
them no one knows what awaits us. 

He proceeded: And now when the young hear all this said about virtue
and vice, and the way in which gods and men regard them, how are their
minds likely to be affected, my dear Socrates, --those of them, I
mean, who are quickwitted, and, like bees on the wing, light on every
flower, and from all that they hear are prone to draw conclusions
as to what manner of persons they should be and in what way they should
walk if they would make the best of life? Probably the youth will
say to himself in the words of Pindar-- 

Can I by justice or by crooked ways of deceit ascend a loftier tower
which may he a fortress to me all my days? For what men say is that,
if I am really just and am not also thought just profit there is none,
but the pain and loss on the other hand are unmistakable. But if,
though unjust, I acquire the reputation of justice, a heavenly life
is promised to me. Since then, as philosophers prove, appearance tyrannizes
over truth and is lord of happiness, to appearance I must devote myself.
I will describe around me a picture and shadow of virtue to be the
vestibule and exterior of my house; behind I will trail the subtle
and crafty fox, as Archilochus, greatest of sages, recommends. But
I hear some one exclaiming that the concealment of wickedness is often
difficult; to which I answer, Nothing great is easy. Nevertheless,
the argument indicates this, if we would be happy, to be the path
along which we should proceed. With a view to concealment we will
establish secret brotherhoods and political clubs. And there are professors
of rhetoric who teach the art of persuading courts and assemblies;
and so, partly by persuasion and partly by force, I shall make unlawful
gains and not be punished. Still I hear a voice saying that the gods
cannot be deceived, neither can they be compelled. But what if there
are no gods? or, suppose them to have no care of human things --why
in either case should we mind about concealment? And even if there
are gods, and they do care about us, yet we know of them only from
tradition and the genealogies of the poets; and these are the very
persons who say that they may be influenced and turned by 'sacrifices
and soothing entreaties and by offerings.' Let us be consistent then,
and believe both or neither. If the poets speak truly, why then we
had better be unjust, and offer of the fruits of injustice; for if
we are just, although we may escape the vengeance of heaven, we shall
lose the gains of injustice; but, if we are unjust, we shall keep
the gains, and by our sinning and praying, and praying and sinning,
the gods will be propitiated, and we shall not be punished. 'But there
is a world below in which either we or our posterity will suffer for
our unjust deeds.' Yes, my friend, will be the reflection, but there
are mysteries and atoning deities, and these have great power. That
is what mighty cities declare; and the children of the gods, who were
their poets and prophets, bear a like testimony. 

On what principle, then, shall we any longer choose justice rather
than the worst injustice? when, if we only unite the latter with a
deceitful regard to appearances, we shall fare to our mind both with
gods and men, in life and after death, as the most numerous and the
highest authorities tell us. Knowing all this, Socrates, how can a
man who has any superiority of mind or person or rank or wealth, be
willing to honour justice; or indeed to refrain from laughing when
he hears justice praised? And even if there should be some one who
is able to disprove the truth of my words, and who is satisfied that
justice is best, still he is not angry with the unjust, but is very
ready to forgive them, because he also knows that men are not just
of their own free will; unless, peradventure, there be some one whom
the divinity within him may have inspired with a hatred of injustice,
or who has attained knowledge of the truth --but no other man. He
only blames injustice who, owing to cowardice or age or some weakness,
has not the power of being unjust. And this is proved by the fact
that when he obtains the power, he immediately becomes unjust as far
as he can be. 

The cause of all this, Socrates, was indicated by us at the beginning
of the argument, when my brother and I told you how astonished we
were to find that of all the professing panegyrists of justice --beginning
with the ancient heroes of whom any memorial has been preserved to
us, and ending with the men of our own time --no one has ever blamed
injustice or praised justice except with a view to the glories, honours,
and benefits which flow from them. No one has ever adequately described
either in verse or prose the true essential nature of either of them
abiding in the soul, and invisible to any human or divine eye; or
shown that of all the things of a man's soul which he has within him,
justice is the greatest good, and injustice the greatest evil. Had
this been the universal strain, had you sought to persuade us of this
from our youth upwards, we should not have been on the watch to keep
one another from doing wrong, but every one would have been his own
watchman, because afraid, if he did wrong, of harbouring in himself
the greatest of evils. I dare say that Thrasymachus and others would
seriously hold the language which I have been merely repeating, and
words even stronger than these about justice and injustice, grossly,
as I conceive, perverting their true nature. But I speak in this vehement
manner, as I must frankly confess to you, because I want to hear from
you the opposite side; and I would ask you to show not only the superiority
which justice has over injustice, but what effect they have on the
possessor of them which makes the one to be a good and the other an
evil to him. And please, as Glaucon requested of you, to exclude reputations;
for unless you take away from each of them his true reputation and
add on the false, we shall say that you do not praise justice, but
the appearance of it; we shall think that you are only exhorting us
to keep injustice dark, and that you really agree with Thrasymachus
in thinking that justice is another's good and the interest of the
stronger, and that injustice is a man's own profit and interest, though
injurious to the weaker. Now as you have admitted that justice is
one of that highest class of goods which are desired indeed for their
results, but in a far greater degree for their own sakes --like sight
or hearing or knowledge or health, or any other real and natural and
not merely conventional good --I would ask you in your praise of justice
to regard one point only: I mean the essential good and evil which
justice and injustice work in the possessors of them. Let others praise
justice and censure injustice, magnifying the rewards and honours
of the one and abusing the other; that is a manner of arguing which,
coming from them, I am ready to tolerate, but from you who have spent
your whole life in the consideration of this question, unless I hear
the contrary from your own lips, I expect something better. And therefore,
I say, not only prove to us that justice is better than injustice,
but show what they either of them do to the possessor of them, which
makes the one to be a good and the other an evil, whether seen or
unseen by gods and men. 
