Socrates - GLAUCON 

What do you mean, Socrates? said Glaucon. The first two modes of payment
are intelligible enough, but what the penalty is I do not understand,
or how a penalty can be a payment. 

You mean that you do not understand the nature of this payment which
to the best men is the great inducement to rule? Of course you know
that ambition and avarice are held to be, as indeed they are, a disgrace?

Very true. 
And for this reason, I said, money and honour have no attraction for
them; good men do not wish to be openly demanding payment for governing
and so to get the name of hirelings, nor by secretly helping themselves
out of the public revenues to get the name of thieves. And not being
ambitious they do not care about honour. Wherefore necessity must
be laid upon them, and they must be induced to serve from the fear
of punishment. And this, as I imagine, is the reason why the forwardness
to take office, instead of waiting to be compelled, has been deemed
dishonourable. Now the worst part of the punishment is that he who
refuses to rule is liable to be ruled by one who is worse than himself.
And the fear of this, as I conceive, induces the good to take office,
not because they would, but because they cannot help --not under the
idea that they are going to have any benefit or enjoyment themselves,
but as a necessity, and because they are not able to commit the task
of ruling to any one who is better than themselves, or indeed as good.
For there is reason to think that if a city were composed entirely
of good men, then to avoid office would be as much an object of contention
as to obtain office is at present; then we should have plain proof
that the true ruler is not meant by nature to regard his own interest,
but that of his subjects; and every one who knew this would choose
rather to receive a benefit from another than to have the trouble
of conferring one. So far am I from agreeing with Thrasymachus that
justice is the interest of the stronger. This latter question need
not be further discussed at present; but when Thrasymachus says that
the life of the unjust is more advantageous than that of the just,
his new statement appears to me to be of a far more serious character.
Which of us has spoken truly? And which sort of life, Glaucon, do
you prefer? 

I for my part deem the life of the just to be the more advantageous,
he answered. 

Did you hear all the advantages of the unjust which Thrasymachus was
rehearsing? 

Yes, I heard him, he replied, but he has not convinced me.

Then shall we try to find some way of convincing him, if we can, that
he is saying what is not true? 

Most certainly, he replied. 
If, I said, he makes a set speech and we make another recounting all
the advantages of being just, and he answers and we rejoin, there
must be a numbering and measuring of the goods which are claimed on
either side, and in the end we shall want judges to decide; but if
we proceed in our enquiry as we lately did, by making admissions to
one another, we shall unite the offices of judge and advocate in our
own persons. 

Very good, he said. 
And which method do I understand you to prefer? I said. 
That which you propose. 
Well, then, Thrasymachus, I said, suppose you begin at the beginning
and answer me. You say that perfect injustice is more gainful than
perfect justice? 

Socrates - GLAUCON - THRASYMACHUS 

Yes, that is what I say, and I have given you my reasons.

And what is your view about them? Would you call one of them virtue
and the other vice? 

Certainly. 
I suppose that you would call justice virtue and injustice vice?

What a charming notion! So likely too, seeing that I affirm injustice
to be profitable and justice not. 

What else then would you say? 
The opposite, he replied. 
And would you call justice vice? 
No, I would rather say sublime simplicity. 
Then would you call injustice malignity? 
No; I would rather say discretion. 
And do the unjust appear to you to be wise and good? 
Yes, he said; at any rate those of them who are able to be perfectly
unjust, and who have the power of subduing states and nations; but
perhaps you imagine me to be talking of cutpurses. 

Even this profession if undetected has advantages, though they are
not to be compared with those of which I was just now speaking.

I do not think that I misapprehend your meaning, Thrasymachus, I replied;
but still I cannot hear without amazement that you class injustice
with wisdom and virtue, and justice with the opposite. 

Certainly I do so class them. 
Now, I said, you are on more substantial and almost unanswerable ground;
for if the injustice which you were maintaining to be profitable had
been admitted by you as by others to be vice and deformity, an answer
might have been given to you on received principles; but now I perceive
that you will call injustice honourable and strong, and to the unjust
you will attribute all the qualities which were attributed by us before
to the just, seeing that you do not hesitate to rank injustice with
wisdom and virtue. 

You have guessed most infallibly, he replied. 
Then I certainly ought not to shrink from going through with the argument
so long as I have reason to think that you, Thrasymachus, are speaking
your real mind; for I do believe that you are now in earnest and are
not amusing yourself at our expense. 

I may be in earnest or not, but what is that to you? --to refute the
argument is your business. 

Very true, I said; that is what I have to do: But will you be so good
as answer yet one more question? Does the just man try to gain any
advantage over the just? 

Far otherwise; if he did would not be the simple, amusing creature
which he is. 

And would he try to go beyond just action? 
He would not. 
And how would he regard the attempt to gain an advantage over the
unjust; would that be considered by him as just or unjust?

He would think it just, and would try to gain the advantage; but he
would not be able. 

Whether he would or would not be able, I said, is not to the point.
My question is only whether the just man, while refusing to have more
than another just man, would wish and claim to have more than the
unjust? 

Yes, he would. 
And what of the unjust --does he claim to have more than the just
man and to do more than is just 

Of course, he said, for he claims to have more than all men.

And the unjust man will strive and struggle to obtain more than the
unjust man or action, in order that he may have more than all?

True. 
We may put the matter thus, I said --the just does not desire more
than his like but more than his unlike, whereas the unjust desires
more than both his like and his unlike? 

Nothing, he said, can be better than that statement. 
And the unjust is good and wise, and the just is neither?

Good again, he said. 
And is not the unjust like the wise and good and the just unlike them?

Of course, he said, he who is of a certain nature, is like those who
are of a certain nature; he who is not, not. 

Each of them, I said, is such as his like is? 
Certainly, he replied. 
Very good, Thrasymachus, I said; and now to take the case of the arts:
you would admit that one man is a musician and another not a musician?

Yes. 
And which is wise and which is foolish? 
Clearly the musician is wise, and he who is not a musician is foolish.

And he is good in as far as he is wise, and bad in as far as he is
foolish? 

Yes. 
And you would say the same sort of thing of the physician?

Yes. 
And do you think, my excellent friend, that a musician when he adjusts
the lyre would desire or claim to exceed or go beyond a musician in
the tightening and loosening the strings? 

I do not think that he would. 
But he would claim to exceed the non-musician? 
Of course. 
And what would you say of the physician? In prescribing meats and
drinks would he wish to go beyond another physician or beyond the
practice of medicine? 

He would not. 
But he would wish to go beyond the non-physician? 
Yes. 
And about knowledge and ignorance in general; see whether you think
that any man who has knowledge ever would wish to have the choice
of saying or doing more than another man who has knowledge. Would
he not rather say or do the same as his like in the same case?

That, I suppose, can hardly be denied. 
And what of the ignorant? would he not desire to have more than either
the knowing or the ignorant? 

I dare say. 
And the knowing is wise? 
Yes. 
And the wise is good? 
True. 
Then the wise and good will not desire to gain more than his like,
but more than his unlike and opposite? 

I suppose so. 
Whereas the bad and ignorant will desire to gain more than both?

Yes. 
But did we not say, Thrasymachus, that the unjust goes beyond both
his like and unlike? Were not these your words? They were.

They were. 
And you also said that the lust will not go beyond his like but his
unlike? 

Yes. 
Then the just is like the wise and good, and the unjust like the evil
and ignorant? 

That is the inference. 
And each of them is such as his like is? 
That was admitted. 
Then the just has turned out to be wise and good and the unjust evil
and ignorant. 

Thrasymachus made all these admissions, not fluently, as I repeat
them, but with extreme reluctance; it was a hot summer's day, and
the perspiration poured from him in torrents; and then I saw what
I had never seen before, Thrasymachus blushing. As we were now agreed
that justice was virtue and wisdom, and injustice vice and ignorance,
I proceeded to another point: 

Well, I said, Thrasymachus, that matter is now settled; but were we
not also saying that injustice had strength; do you remember?

Yes, I remember, he said, but do not suppose that I approve of what
you are saying or have no answer; if however I were to answer, you
would be quite certain to accuse me of haranguing; therefore either
permit me to have my say out, or if you would rather ask, do so, and
I will answer 'Very good,' as they say to story-telling old women,
and will nod 'Yes' and 'No.' 

Certainly not, I said, if contrary to your real opinion.

Yes, he said, I will, to please you, since you will not let me speak.
What else would you have? 

Nothing in the world, I said; and if you are so disposed I will ask
and you shall answer. 

Proceed. 
Then I will repeat the question which I asked before, in order that
our examination of the relative nature of justice and injustice may
be carried on regularly. A statement was made that injustice is stronger
and more powerful than justice, but now justice, having been identified
with wisdom and virtue, is easily shown to be stronger than injustice,
if injustice is ignorance; this can no longer be questioned by any
one. But I want to view the matter, Thrasymachus, in a different way:
You would not deny that a state may be unjust and may be unjustly
attempting to enslave other states, or may have already enslaved them,
and may be holding many of them in subjection? 

True, he replied; and I will add the best and perfectly unjust state
will be most likely to do so. 

I know, I said, that such was your position; but what I would further
consider is, whether this power which is possessed by the superior
state can exist or be exercised without justice. 

If you are right in you view, and justice is wisdom, then only with
justice; but if I am right, then without justice. 

I am delighted, Thrasymachus, to see you not only nodding assent and
dissent, but making answers which are quite excellent. 

That is out of civility to you, he replied. 
You are very kind, I said; and would you have the goodness also to
inform me, whether you think that a state, or an army, or a band of
robbers and thieves, or any other gang of evil-doers could act at
all if they injured one another? 

No indeed, he said, they could not. 
But if they abstained from injuring one another, then they might act
together better? 

Yes. 
And this is because injustice creates divisions and hatreds and fighting,
and justice imparts harmony and friendship; is not that true, Thrasymachus?

I agree, he said, because I do not wish to quarrel with you.

How good of you, I said; but I should like to know also whether injustice,
having this tendency to arouse hatred, wherever existing, among slaves
or among freemen, will not make them hate one another and set them
at variance and render them incapable of common action? 

Certainly. 
And even if injustice be found in two only, will they not quarrel
and fight, and become enemies to one another and to the just

They will. 
And suppose injustice abiding in a single person, would your wisdom
say that she loses or that she retains her natural power?

Let us assume that she retains her power. 
Yet is not the power which injustice exercises of such a nature that
wherever she takes up her abode, whether in a city, in an army, in
a family, or in any other body, that body is, to begin with, rendered
incapable of united action by reason of sedition and distraction;
and does it not become its own enemy and at variance with all that
opposes it, and with the just? Is not this the case? 

Yes, certainly. 
And is not injustice equally fatal when existing in a single person;
in the first place rendering him incapable of action because he is
not at unity with himself, and in the second place making him an enemy
to himself and the just? Is not that true, Thrasymachus?

Yes. 
And O my friend, I said, surely the gods are just? 
Granted that they are. 
But if so, the unjust will be the enemy of the gods, and the just
will be their friend? 

Feast away in triumph, and take your fill of the argument; I will
not oppose you, lest I should displease the company. 

Well then, proceed with your answers, and let me have the remainder
of my repast. For we have already shown that the just are clearly
wiser and better and abler than the unjust, and that the unjust are
incapable of common action; nay ing at more, that to speak as we did
of men who are evil acting at any time vigorously together, is not
strictly true, for if they had been perfectly evil, they would have
laid hands upon one another; but it is evident that there must have
been some remnant of justice in them, which enabled them to combine;
if there had not been they would have injured one another as well
as their victims; they were but half --villains in their enterprises;
for had they been whole villains, and utterly unjust, they would have
been utterly incapable of action. That, as I believe, is the truth
of the matter, and not what you said at first. But whether the just
have a better and happier life than the unjust is a further question
which we also proposed to consider. I think that they have, and for
the reasons which to have given; but still I should like to examine
further, for no light matter is at stake, nothing less than the rule
of human life. 

Proceed. 
I will proceed by asking a question: Would you not say that a horse
has some end? 

I should. 
And the end or use of a horse or of anything would be that which could
not be accomplished, or not so well accomplished, by any other thing?

I do not understand, he said. 
Let me explain: Can you see, except with the eye? 
Certainly not. 
Or hear, except with the ear? 
No. 
These then may be truly said to be the ends of these organs?

They may. 
But you can cut off a vine-branch with a dagger or with a chisel,
and in many other ways? 

Of course. 
And yet not so well as with a pruning-hook made for the purpose?

True. 
May we not say that this is the end of a pruning-hook? 
We may. 
Then now I think you will have no difficulty in understanding my meaning
when I asked the question whether the end of anything would be that
which could not be accomplished, or not so well accomplished, by any
other thing? 

I understand your meaning, he said, and assent. 
And that to which an end is appointed has also an excellence? Need
I ask again whether the eye has an end? 

It has. 
And has not the eye an excellence? 
Yes. 
And the ear has an end and an excellence also? 
True. 
And the same is true of all other things; they have each of them an
end and a special excellence? 

That is so. 
Well, and can the eyes fulfil their end if they are wanting in their
own proper excellence and have a defect instead? 

How can they, he said, if they are blind and cannot see?

You mean to say, if they have lost their proper excellence, which
is sight; but I have not arrived at that point yet. I would rather
ask the question more generally, and only enquire whether the things
which fulfil their ends fulfil them by their own proper excellence,
and fall of fulfilling them by their own defect? 

Certainly, he replied. 
I might say the same of the ears; when deprived of their own proper
excellence they cannot fulfil their end? 

True. 
And the same observation will apply to all other things?

I agree. 
Well; and has not the soul an end which nothing else can fulfil? for
example, to superintend and command and deliberate and the like. Are
not these functions proper to the soul, and can they rightly be assigned
to any other? 

To no other. 
And is not life to be reckoned among the ends of the soul?

Assuredly, he said. 
And has not the soul an excellence also? 
Yes. 
And can she or can she not fulfil her own ends when deprived of that
excellence? 

She cannot. 
Then an evil soul must necessarily be an evil ruler and superintendent,
and the good soul a good ruler? 

Yes, necessarily. 
And we have admitted that justice is the excellence of the soul, and
injustice the defect of the soul? 

That has been admitted. 
Then the just soul and the just man will live well, and the unjust
man will live ill? 

That is what your argument proves. 
And he who lives well is blessed and happy, and he who lives ill the
reverse of happy? 

Certainly. 
Then the just is happy, and the unjust miserable? 
So be it. 
But happiness and not misery is profitable. 
Of course. 
Then, my blessed Thrasymachus, injustice can never be more profitable
than justice. 

Let this, Socrates, he said, be your entertainment at the Bendidea.

For which I am indebted to you, I said, now that you have grown gentle
towards me and have left off scolding. Nevertheless, I have not been
well entertained; but that was my own fault and not yours. As an epicure
snatches a taste of every dish which is successively brought to table,
he not having allowed himself time to enjoy the one before, so have
I gone from one subject to another without having discovered what
I sought at first, the nature of justice. I left that enquiry and
turned away to consider whether justice is virtue and wisdom or evil
and folly; and when there arose a further question about the comparative
advantages of justice and injustice, I could not refrain from passing
on to that. And the result of the whole discussion has been that I
know nothing at all. For I know not what justice is, and therefore
I am not likely to know whether it is or is not a virtue, nor can
I say whether the just man is happy or unhappy. 


Socrates - GLAUCON 

With these words I was thinking that I had made an end of the discussion;
but the end, in truth, proved to be only a beginning. For Glaucon,
who is always the most pugnacious of men, was dissatisfied at Thrasymachus'
retirement; he wanted to have the battle out. So he said to me: Socrates,
do you wish really to persuade us, or only to seem to have persuaded
us, that to be just is always better than to be unjust? 

I should wish really to persuade you, I replied, if I could.

Then you certainly have not succeeded. Let me ask you now: --How would
you arrange goods --are there not some which we welcome for their
own sakes, and independently of their consequences, as, for example,
harmless pleasures and enjoyments, which delight us at the time, although
nothing follows from them? 

I agree in thinking that there is such a class, I replied.

Is there not also a second class of goods, such as knowledge, sight,
health, which are desirable not only in themselves, but also for their
results? 

Certainly, I said. 
And would you not recognize a third class, such as gymnastic, and
the care of the sick, and the physician's art; also the various ways
of money-making --these do us good but we regard them as disagreeable;
and no one would choose them for their own sakes, but only for the
sake of some reward or result which flows from them? 

There is, I said, this third class also. But why do you ask?

Because I want to know in which of the three classes you would place
justice? 

In the highest class, I replied, --among those goods which he who
would be happy desires both for their own sake and for the sake of
their results. 

Then the many are of another mind; they think that justice is to be
reckoned in the troublesome class, among goods which are to be pursued
for the sake of rewards and of reputation, but in themselves are disagreeable
and rather to be avoided. 

I know, I said, that this is their manner of thinking, and that this
was the thesis which Thrasymachus was maintaining just now, when he
censured justice and praised injustice. But I am too stupid to be
convinced by him. 

I wish, he said, that you would hear me as well as him, and then I
shall see whether you and I agree. For Thrasymachus seems to me, like
a snake, to have been charmed by your voice sooner than he ought to
have been; but to my mind the nature of justice and injustice have
not yet been made clear. Setting aside their rewards and results,
I want to know what they are in themselves, and how they inwardly
work in the soul. If you, please, then, I will revive the argument
of Thrasymachus. And first I will speak of the nature and origin of
justice according to the common view of them. Secondly, I will show
that all men who practise justice do so against their will, of necessity,
but not as a good. And thirdly, I will argue that there is reason
in this view, for the life of the unjust is after all better far than
the life of the just --if what they say is true, Socrates, since I
myself am not of their opinion. But still I acknowledge that I am
perplexed when I hear the voices of Thrasymachus and myriads of others
dinning in my ears; and, on the other hand, I have never yet heard
the superiority of justice to injustice maintained by any one in a
satisfactory way. I want to hear justice praised in respect of itself;
then I shall be satisfied, and you are the person from whom I think
that I am most likely to hear this; and therefore I will praise the
unjust life to the utmost of my power, and my manner of speaking will
indicate the manner in which I desire to hear you too praising justice
and censuring injustice. Will you say whether you approve of my proposal?

Indeed I do; nor can I imagine any theme about which a man of sense
would oftener wish to converse. 

I am delighted, he replied, to hear you say so, and shall begin by
speaking, as I proposed, of the nature and origin of justice.

Glaucon 

They say that to do injustice is, by nature, good; to suffer injustice,
evil; but that the evil is greater than the good. And so when men
have both done and suffered injustice and have had experience of both,
not being able to avoid the one and obtain the other, they think that
they had better agree among themselves to have neither; hence there
arise laws and mutual covenants; and that which is ordained by law
is termed by them lawful and just. This they affirm to be the origin
and nature of justice; --it is a mean or compromise, between the best
of all, which is to do injustice and not be punished, and the worst
of all, which is to suffer injustice without the power of retaliation;
and justice, being at a middle point between the two, is tolerated
not as a good, but as the lesser evil, and honoured by reason of the
inability of men to do injustice. For no man who is worthy to be called
a man would ever submit to such an agreement if he were able to resist;
he would be mad if he did. Such is the received account, Socrates,
of the nature and origin of justice. 

Now that those who practise justice do so involuntarily and because
they have not the power to be unjust will best appear if we imagine
something of this kind: having given both to the just and the unjust
power to do what they will, let us watch and see whither desire will
lead them; then we shall discover in the very act the just and unjust
man to be proceeding along the same road, following their interest,
which all natures deem to be their good, and are only diverted into
the path of justice by the force of law. The liberty which we are
supposing may be most completely given to them in the form of such
a power as is said to have been possessed by Gyges the ancestor of
Croesus the Lydian. According to the tradition, Gyges was a shepherd
in the service of the king of Lydia; there was a great storm, and
an earthquake made an opening in the earth at the place where he was
feeding his flock. Amazed at the sight, he descended into the opening,
where, among other marvels, he beheld a hollow brazen horse, having
doors, at which he stooping and looking in saw a dead body of stature,
as appeared to him, more than human, and having nothing on but a gold
ring; this he took from the finger of the dead and reascended. Now
the shepherds met together, according to custom, that they might send
their monthly report about the flocks to the king; into their assembly
he came having the ring on his finger, and as he was sitting among
them he chanced to turn the collet of the ring inside his hand, when
instantly he became invisible to the rest of the company and they
began to speak of him as if he were no longer present. He was astonished
at this, and again touching the ring he turned the collet outwards
and reappeared; he made several trials of the ring, and always with
the same result-when he turned the collet inwards he became invisible,
when outwards he reappeared. Whereupon he contrived to be chosen one
of the messengers who were sent to the court; where as soon as he
arrived he seduced the queen, and with her help conspired against
the king and slew him, and took the kingdom. Suppose now that there
were two such magic rings, and the just put on one of them and the
unjust the other;,no man can be imagined to be of such an iron nature
that he would stand fast in justice. No man would keep his hands off
what was not his own when he could safely take what he liked out of
the market, or go into houses and lie with any one at his pleasure,
or kill or release from prison whom he would, and in all respects
be like a God among men. Then the actions of the just would be as
the actions of the unjust; they would both come at last to the same
point. And this we may truly affirm to be a great proof that a man
is just, not willingly or because he thinks that justice is any good
to him individually, but of necessity, for wherever any one thinks
that he can safely be unjust, there he is unjust. For all men believe
in their hearts that injustice is far more profitable to the individual
than justice, and he who argues as I have been supposing, will say
that they are right. If you could imagine any one obtaining this power
of becoming invisible, and never doing any wrong or touching what
was another's, he would be thought by the lookers-on to be a most
wretched idiot, although they would praise him to one another's faces,
and keep up appearances with one another from a fear that they too
might suffer injustice. Enough of this. 

Now, if we are to form a real judgment of the life of the just and
unjust, we must isolate them; there is no other way; and how is the
isolation to be effected? I answer: Let the unjust man be entirely
unjust, and the just man entirely just; nothing is to be taken away
from either of them, and both are to be perfectly furnished for the
work of their respective lives. First, let the unjust be like other
distinguished masters of craft; like the skilful pilot or physician,
who knows intuitively his own powers and keeps within their limits,
and who, if he fails at any point, is able to recover himself. So
let the unjust make his unjust attempts in the right way, and lie
hidden if he means to be great in his injustice (he who is found out
is nobody): for the highest reach of injustice is: to be deemed just
when you are not. Therefore I say that in the perfectly unjust man
we must assume the most perfect injustice; there is to be no deduction,
but we must allow him, while doing the most unjust acts, to have acquired
the greatest reputation for justice. If he have taken a false step
he must be able to recover himself; he must be one who can speak with
effect, if any of his deeds come to light, and who can force his way
where force is required his courage and strength, and command of money
and friends. And at his side let us place the just man in his nobleness
and simplicity, wishing, as Aeschylus says, to be and not to seem
good. There must be no seeming, for if he seem to be just he will
be honoured and rewarded, and then we shall not know whether he is
just for the sake of justice or for the sake of honours and rewards;
therefore, let him be clothed in justice only, and have no other covering;
and he must be imagined in a state of life the opposite of the former.
Let him be the best of men, and let him be thought the worst; then
he will have been put to the proof; and we shall see whether he will
be affected by the fear of infamy and its consequences. And let him
continue thus to the hour of death; being just and seeming to be unjust.
When both have reached the uttermost extreme, the one of justice and
the other of injustice, let judgment be given which of them is the
happier of the two. 

Socrates - GLAUCON 

Heavens! my dear Glaucon, I said, how energetically you polish them
up for the decision, first one and then the other, as if they were
two statues. 

I do my best, he said. And now that we know what they are like there
is no difficulty in tracing out the sort of life which awaits either
of them. This I will proceed to describe; but as you may think the
description a little too coarse, I ask you to suppose, Socrates, that
the words which follow are not mine. --Let me put them into the mouths
of the eulogists of injustice: They will tell you that the just man
who is thought unjust will be scourged, racked, bound --will have
his eyes burnt out; and, at last, after suffering every kind of evil,
he will be impaled: Then he will understand that he ought to seem
only, and not to be, just; the words of Aeschylus may be more truly
spoken of the unjust than of the just. For the unjust is pursuing
a reality; he does not live with a view to appearances --he wants
to be really unjust and not to seem only:-- 

His mind has a soil deep and fertile, 
Out of which spring his prudent counsels. In the first place, he is
thought just, and therefore bears rule in the city; he can marry whom
he will, and give in marriage to whom he will; also he can trade and
deal where he likes, and always to his own advantage, because he has
no misgivings about injustice and at every contest, whether in public
or private, he gets the better of his antagonists, and gains at their
expense, and is rich, and out of his gains he can benefit his friends,
and harm his enemies; moreover, he can offer sacrifices, and dedicate
gifts to the gods abundantly and magnificently, and can honour the
gods or any man whom he wants to honour in a far better style than
the just, and therefore he is likely to be dearer than they are to
the gods. And thus, Socrates, gods and men are said to unite in making
the life of the unjust better than the life of the just.