Socrates - GLAUCON 

I went down yesterday to the Piraeus with Glaucon the son of Ariston,
that I might offer up my prayers to the goddess; and also because
I wanted to see in what manner they would celebrate the festival,
which was a new thing. I was delighted with the procession of the
inhabitants; but that of the Thracians was equally, if not more, beautiful.
When we had finished our prayers and viewed the spectacle, we turned
in the direction of the city; and at that instant Polemarchus the
son of Cephalus chanced to catch sight of us from a distance as we
were starting on our way home, and told his servant to run and bid
us wait for him. The servant took hold of me by the cloak behind,
and said: Polemarchus desires you to wait. 

I turned round, and asked him where his master was. 
There he is, said the youth, coming after you, if you will only wait.

Certainly we will, said Glaucon; and in a few minutes Polemarchus
appeared, and with him Adeimantus, Glaucon's brother, Niceratus the
son of Nicias, and several others who had been at the procession.

Socrates - POLEMARCHUS - GLAUCON - ADEIMANTUS 

Polemarchus said to me: I perceive, Socrates, that you and our companion
are already on your way to the city. 

You are not far wrong, I said. 
But do you see, he rejoined, how many we are? 
Of course. 
And are you stronger than all these? for if not, you will have to
remain where you are. 

May there not be the alternative, I said, that we may persuade you
to let us go? 

But can you persuade us, if we refuse to listen to you? he said.

Certainly not, replied Glaucon. 
Then we are not going to listen; of that you may be assured.

Adeimantus added: Has no one told you of the torch-race on horseback
in honour of the goddess which will take place in the evening?

With horses! I replied: That is a novelty. Will horsemen carry torches
and pass them one to another during the race? 

Yes, said Polemarchus, and not only so, but a festival will he celebrated
at night, which you certainly ought to see. Let us rise soon after
supper and see this festival; there will be a gathering of young men,
and we will have a good talk. Stay then, and do not be perverse.

Glaucon said: I suppose, since you insist, that we must.

Very good, I replied. 

Socrates - POLEMARCHUS 

Tell me then, O thou heir of the argument, what did Simonides say,
and according to you truly say, about justice? 

He said that the repayment of a debt is just, and in saying so he
appears to me to be right. 

I should be sorry to doubt the word of such a wise and inspired man,
but his meaning, though probably clear to you, is the reverse of clear
to me. For he certainly does not mean, as we were now saying that
I ought to return a return a deposit of arms or of anything else to
one who asks for it when he is not in his right senses; and yet a
deposit cannot be denied to be a debt. 

True. 
Then when the person who asks me is not in his right mind I am by
no means to make the return? 

Certainly not. 
When Simonides said that the repayment of a debt was justice, he did
not mean to include that case? 

Certainly not; for he thinks that a friend ought always to do good
to a friend and never evil. 

You mean that the return of a deposit of gold which is to the injury
of the receiver, if the two parties are friends, is not the repayment
of a debt, --that is what you would imagine him to say? 

Yes. 
And are enemies also to receive what we owe to them? 
To be sure, he said, they are to receive what we owe them, and an
enemy, as I take it, owes to an enemy that which is due or proper
to him --that is to say, evil. 

Simonides, then, after the manner of poets, would seem to have spoken
darkly of the nature of justice; for he really meant to say that justice
is the giving to each man what is proper to him, and this he termed
a debt. 

That must have been his meaning, he said. 
By heaven! I replied; and if we asked him what due or proper thing
is given by medicine, and to whom, what answer do you think that he
would make to us? 

He would surely reply that medicine gives drugs and meat and drink
to human bodies. 

And what due or proper thing is given by cookery, and to what?

Seasoning to food. 
And what is that which justice gives, and to whom? 
If, Socrates, we are to be guided at all by the analogy of the preceding
instances, then justice is the art which gives good to friends and
evil to enemies. 

That is his meaning then? 
I think so. 
And who is best able to do good to his friends and evil to his enemies
in time of sickness? 

The physician. 
Or when they are on a voyage, amid the perils of the sea?

The pilot. 
And in what sort of actions or with a view to what result is the just
man most able to do harm to his enemy and good to his friends?

In going to war against the one and in making alliances with the other.

But when a man is well, my dear Polemarchus, there is no need of a
physician? 

No. 
And he who is not on a voyage has no need of a pilot? 
No. 
Then in time of peace justice will be of no use? 
I am very far from thinking so. 
You think that justice may be of use in peace as well as in war?

Yes. 
Like husbandry for the acquisition of corn? 
Yes. 
Or like shoemaking for the acquisition of shoes, --that is what you
mean? 

Yes. 
And what similar use or power of acquisition has justice in time of
peace? 

In contracts, Socrates, justice is of use. 
And by contracts you mean partnerships? 
Exactly. 
But is the just man or the skilful player a more useful and better
partner at a game of draughts? 

The skilful player. 
And in the laying of bricks and stones is the just man a more useful
or better partner than the builder? 

Quite the reverse. 
Then in what sort of partnership is the just man a better partner
than the harp-player, as in playing the harp the harp-player is certainly
a better partner than the just man? 

In a money partnership. 
Yes, Polemarchus, but surely not in the use of money; for you do not
want a just man to be your counsellor the purchase or sale of a horse;
a man who is knowing about horses would be better for that, would
he not? 

Certainly. 
And when you want to buy a ship, the shipwright or the pilot would
be better? 

True. 
Then what is that joint use of silver or gold in which the just man
is to be preferred? 

When you want a deposit to be kept safely. 
You mean when money is not wanted, but allowed to lie? 
Precisely. 
That is to say, justice is useful when money is useless?

That is the inference. 
And when you want to keep a pruning-hook safe, then justice is useful
to the individual and to the state; but when you want to use it, then
the art of the vine-dresser? 

Clearly. 
And when you want to keep a shield or a lyre, and not to use them,
you would say that justice is useful; but when you want to use them,
then the art of the soldier or of the musician? 

Certainly. 
And so of all the other things; --justice is useful when they are
useless, and useless when they are useful? 

That is the inference. 
Then justice is not good for much. But let us consider this further
point: Is not he who can best strike a blow in a boxing match or in
any kind of fighting best able to ward off a blow? 

Certainly. 
And he who is most skilful in preventing or escaping from a disease
is best able to create one? 

True. 
And he is the best guard of a camp who is best able to steal a march
upon the enemy? 

Certainly. 
Then he who is a good keeper of anything is also a good thief?

That, I suppose, is to be inferred. 
Then if the just man is good at keeping money, he is good at stealing
it. 

That is implied in the argument. 
Then after all the just man has turned out to be a thief. And this
is a lesson which I suspect you must have learnt out of Homer; for
he, speaking of Autolycus, the maternal grandfather of Odysseus, who
is a favourite of his, affirms that 

He was excellent above all men in theft and perjury. And so, you and
Homer and Simonides are agreed that justice is an art of theft; to
be practised however 'for the good of friends and for the harm of
enemies,' --that was what you were saying? 

No, certainly not that, though I do not now know what I did say; but
I still stand by the latter words. 

Well, there is another question: By friends and enemies do we mean
those who are so really, or only in seeming? 

Surely, he said, a man may be expected to love those whom he thinks
good, and to hate those whom he thinks evil. 

Yes, but do not persons often err about good and evil: many who are
not good seem to be so, and conversely? 

That is true. 
Then to them the good will be enemies and the evil will be their friends?
True. 

And in that case they will be right in doing good to the evil and
evil to the good? 

Clearly. 
But the good are just and would not do an injustice? 
True. 
Then according to your argument it is just to injure those who do
no wrong? 

Nay, Socrates; the doctrine is immoral. 
Then I suppose that we ought to do good to the just and harm to the
unjust? 

I like that better. 
But see the consequence: --Many a man who is ignorant of human nature
has friends who are bad friends, and in that case he ought to do harm
to them; and he has good enemies whom he ought to benefit; but, if
so, we shall be saying the very opposite of that which we affirmed
to be the meaning of Simonides. 

Very true, he said: and I think that we had better correct an error
into which we seem to have fallen in the use of the words 'friend'
and 'enemy.' 

What was the error, Polemarchus? I asked. 
We assumed that he is a friend who seems to be or who is thought good.

And how is the error to be corrected? 
We should rather say that he is a friend who is, as well as seems,
good; and that he who seems only, and is not good, only seems to be
and is not a friend; and of an enemy the same may be said.

You would argue that the good are our friends and the bad our enemies?

Yes. 
And instead of saying simply as we did at first, that it is just to
do good to our friends and harm to our enemies, we should further
say: It is just to do good to our friends when they are good and harm
to our enemies when they are evil? 

Yes, that appears to me to be the truth. 
But ought the just to injure any one at all? 
Undoubtedly he ought to injure those who are both wicked and his enemies.

When horses are injured, are they improved or deteriorated?

The latter. 
Deteriorated, that is to say, in the good qualities of horses, not
of dogs? 

Yes, of horses. 
And dogs are deteriorated in the good qualities of dogs, and not of
horses? 

Of course. 
And will not men who are injured be deteriorated in that which is
the proper virtue of man? 

Certainly. 
And that human virtue is justice? 
To be sure. 
Then men who are injured are of necessity made unjust? 
That is the result. 
But can the musician by his art make men unmusical? 
Certainly not. 
Or the horseman by his art make them bad horsemen? 
Impossible. 
And can the just by justice make men unjust, or speaking general can
the good by virtue make them bad? 

Assuredly not. 
Any more than heat can produce cold? 
It cannot. 
Or drought moisture? 
Clearly not. 
Nor can the good harm any one? 
Impossible. 
And the just is the good? 
Certainly. 
Then to injure a friend or any one else is not the act of a just man,
but of the opposite, who is the unjust? 

I think that what you say is quite true, Socrates. 
Then if a man says that justice consists in the repayment of debts,
and that good is the debt which a man owes to his friends, and evil
the debt which he owes to his enemies, --to say this is not wise;
for it is not true, if, as has been clearly shown, the injuring of
another can be in no case just. 

I agree with you, said Polemarchus. 
Then you and I are prepared to take up arms against any one who attributes
such a saying to Simonides or Bias or Pittacus, or any other wise
man or seer? 

I am quite ready to do battle at your side, he said. 
Shall I tell you whose I believe the saying to be? 
Whose? 
I believe that Periander or Perdiccas or Xerxes or Ismenias the Theban,
or some other rich and mighty man, who had a great opinion of his
own power, was the first to say that justice is 'doing good to your
friends and harm to your enemies.' 

Most true, he said. 
Yes, I said; but if this definition of justice also breaks down, what
other can be offered? 

Several times in the course of the discussion Thrasymachus had made
an attempt to get the argument into his own hands, and had been put
down by the rest of the company, who wanted to hear the end. But when
Polemarchus and I had done speaking and there was a pause, he could
no longer hold his peace; and, gathering himself up, he came at us
like a wild beast, seeking to devour us. We were quite panic-stricken
at the sight of him. 
